Date: Thu, 21 Jan 99 11:12:55 CST
From: Clive Dawson <clive.dawson@amd.com>
To: js-cgi@inwap.com
Subject: Greetings...

Hi Joe,

I was just enjoying your PDP-10 website after not visiting it in
a while.

I noticed that for some reason you don't have a copy of a story I
wrote 15 years ago, "The Soul of an Old Machine".  I'm enclosing
it below, and would be happy to contribute it to your collection.

If the famous "book" project ever gets anywhere, this story was going
to be used as the Epilogue.

Cheers,

Clive Dawson
Austin, TX

=========Cut here==========




			THE SOUL OF AN OLD MACHINE

			     Clive B. Dawson
				
				(C) 1984


I started work for the University  Computation Center in 1975 as a  systems
programmer for the  DEC-10, just  a couple of  months after  it arrived  on
campus.  My previous experience  with a DEC-10 had  ended when I  graduated
from Stevens Tech.  Since then, I had spent four rather painful years doing
graduate work on a CDC 6600 system for which I had to learn how to keypunch
again.  I welcomed  the arrival of  the 10  with the joy  of someone  being
released from prison.  I  can't begin to  count the hours  I spent on  that
system--well over 10,000 connect hours-- developing software for it, fixing
bugs, and helping users.  In turn, it helped produce dissertations for both
my wife and me, and  was an endless source of  fun and relaxation as  well.
(It was also  responsible for  extending my  graduate school  career by  at
least four years!)

The KI processor had  served the campus  well for seven  and a half  years.
Now the user population was drifting over  to the two new DEC-20's, and  it
was only a  matter of  time before the  rising maintenance  costs could  no
longer be justified.  A flurry  of last-minute rescue efforts followed  the
announcement that  the  system would  have  to  be shut  down.   It  seemed
incomprehensible that  a  perfectly  good machine  would  be  removed  from
service given  the chronic  state  of saturation  common to  most  computer
systems on most university  campuses.  The efforts  failed, and on  October
31, 1982, the DECsystem-10 at the University of Texas at Austin was  turned
off for the last time.

The event did not pass without due  ceremony.  We held a farewell party  on
that Halloween Sunday,  well attended by  current and ex  staff members  as
well  as  a  few  users.   Many  brought  cameras  to  record  a  vanishing
breed--they don't make  'em with lights  anymore.  In one  of the  stranger
moments we cranked up the PTP: and had paper tape (might as well use it up)
and scratch magtape  draped all over  the place.  The  laughing and  joking
helped.  Many of us on the staff had built up an extremely close-knit group
over the  years which  had slowly  drifted apart  as new  machines and  new
responsibilites came  along.   This "wake"  had  a good  cathartic  effect,
bringing us together at a  time when we needed  to share feelings that  had
hit us harder than we might have cared to admit.

I wondered about  the users--all  the faceless  people scattered  througout
dozens of  small  offices and  terminal  rooms throughout  the  campus--the
complete opposite of our  small, close-knit staff.   Were they feeling  the
same emotions?  If so, who could each of them share with?

At home very late that night, I felt the urge to dial up one last time.  As
I went through  my normal  routine of checking  mail, the  Bboard, and  the
various system  mailboxes, I  discovered something  completely  unexpected.
During the last few hours users had  logged in and sent mail to the  bboard
and to other  system mailboxes like  Operator.  The curious  thing is  that
these people had no  way of knowing  that anybody would  ever be around  to
read these messages.   They were, in  the best way  they knew how,  sharing
their feelings  directly  with  the  machine.  Some  of  the  messages  are
reproduced here as I found them, with only the senders' names altered.


	. From: R. B.
	. Subject: Dec10
	. To:	 GRIPE
	Farewell DEC10 and thank you!


	. From: [4435,244]
	. Subject: The death of a friend
	. To: Bboard
	Goodbye, DEC-10, you've been a great friend and co-worker.  I'm
	going to miss you for a long time.  I feel worse than when they
	killed Hal in 2001.


	. From: B. J.
	. Subject: November the 2 is too late
	. To: Bboard
	it feels like this is the end of an old friend.  who says
	computers haven't got any personality?


	. From: GVCE333
	. Subject: Good-Bye old paint
	. To: Bboard
	The glue factory beckons...   Sigh!


	. From: [1276,1]
	. Subject: Good-bye, DEC-10
	. To: Bboard
		As a well-spent day bring happy sleep,
	        so life well used brings happy death.
		                Leonardo Da Vinci, 1452-1519
	                        Notebooks [c. 1500]
	 
	DEC-10, you've been a good and faithful (for the most part)
	servant and companion.  Farewell.


	. From: BSAB553
	. Subject: bye
	. To:	 GRIPE
	This is last "bye" to the DEC 10; too bad. I liked the DEC 10
	better than the DEC 20. I find it hard to believe that this
	system could not have been supported to some extent... So long
	forever!


	. From: LSDT141
	. Subject: Bye
	. To:	 OPERATOR
	BYE BYE FAITHFUL FRIEND - THE DEC-10


	. From: C
	. Subject: Farewell
	. To: Operator
	
		Do not go gentle into that good night,
		Rage, rage against the dying of the light...


The next day, one more message appeared on the DEC-20 Bboard:

	Date:  1 Nov 1982 2133-CST
	From: P.M.
	Subject: the death of the dec-10
	To: bboard

	I was there till the bitter end.  First, the one or two
	faithful logged on via the micom were detached and
	automatically logged off.  As the only telephone hook-up, I
	was privileged to be at his side a little longer.  I fondly
	reread the last farewells of those who had cared enough to
	write a bboard message.  Then I, too, was detached and logged
	off.  But even then the DEC-10 lingered on.  Systat and help
	functioned for several more minutes until the operator sent
	the last message I or anyone will ever receive from the
	DEC-10:
	
		Time sharing is over permanently! Good-bye.
	
	The stone has been rolled in front of the grave, my friends.
        The DEC-10 is no more.


			---------------------------------------


About six months later  in St. Louis  I heard DEC announce  the end of  the
36-bit systems.   I wondered  then how  many times  in the  next few  years
the events told here would be repeated.

Recently I had  occasion to visit  the machine  room where the  old KI  had
stood.  On one side of the room was a shiny new VAX 11/780.  The other side
of the room had boxes  of IBM PC's stacked  to the ceiling.  Someday  these
machines would be old too.  But somehow I knew that they would never have a
day for themselves like Halloween of 1982.  They don't make 'em with  souls
anymore.

			   ----------------



